---
layout: post
title: Law of Cosines
date: 2024-29-05 11:12:00-0400
description: Discussion of the law of cosines and related ideas. 
tags: math, trig
categories: trig
related_posts: false
---

Recently I used the Law of Cosines to calculate the side lengths of triangles. In using it I was applying the LoC to an icoseles triangle and noticed something interesting. 

Let $a = b$,
\begin{aligned}
c^2 &= a^2 + b^2 - 2ab\cos\theta\\
    &= a^2 + a^2 - 2aa\cos\theta\\
    &= 2a^2 - 2a^2\cos\theta\\
    &= (1-\cos\theta)a^2
\end{aligned}

Now if we square root both sides then we can notice that $a$ and $c$ are proportional based on the cosine of the angle. A related statment is that of the standard 45-45-90 triangle where we have $a = \sqrt{2}c$ again a simple proportional relationship. Something that clicked in my mind is that the LoC is somehow measuring the "distance" from a triangle being a right triangle. The value of $2ab\cos\theta$ is, in a sense, the error value of the triangle being right. 

I originaly thought of this because I had been reading about [Lie Algebras](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lie_algebra#Basic_examples) where you can add an additional operation called the Lie bracket. In some cases this is defined as $[x,y] = xy-yx$. The value that this takes, for two elements $a$ and $b$, can be considered as how far apart these elements are from being commutative. 

Thinking about this realationship more there is an even simpler example, the dot product. In learning about vectors students are taught the dot product between vectors as being related to the measure between the angles. One way to calculate the dot product is $u \cdot v = |u||v|\cos\theta$ where we can see a clear similarity to our LoC. 

This relationship is actualy exactly how we can prove that the definition of the dot product is actually consistent [refernce](https://www.mit.edu/~hlb/StantonGrant/18.02/details/tex/lec1snip2-dotprod.pdf).

Surely I was shown this at somepoint in my courses but I dont explicilty remember that and thought this explanation was worth sharing. One of the points that can be made is that all the way through mathematics this concept exists. Measuring the error of some condition holding is a core piece of advanced math and it encountered as early as trigonomtetry. Revealing this early on could foster some interest in higher math or atleast provide context for why pieces of math like this are important. 
